README.md, before:

![](https://img.shields.io/badge/PyTorch-1.10-green)
![](https://img.shields.io/badge/OpenCV-4.5-blue)
![](https://img.shields.io/badge/NiBabel-3.2-red)
# 3D (Volumetric) Medical Image Segmentation with Deep Learning
This GitHub repository was created for research focusing on the development of deep learning-based segmentation models for fetal brain tissue.


Project Organization
------------

    ├── LICENSE
    ├── Makefile           <- Makefile with commands like `make data` or `make train`
    ├── README.md          <- The top-level README for developers using this project.
    ├── data
    │   ├── external       <- Data from third party sources.
    │   ├── interim        <- Intermediate data that has been transformed.
    │   ├── processed      <- The final, canonical data sets for modeling.
    │   └── raw            <- The original, immutable data dump.
    │
    ├── docs               <- A default Sphinx project; see sphinx-doc.org for details
    │
    ├── models             <- Trained and serialized models, model predictions, or model summaries
    │
    ├── notebooks          <- Jupyter notebooks. Naming convention is a number (for ordering),
    │                         the creator's initials, and a short `-` delimited description, e.g.
    │                         `1.0-jqp-initial-data-exploration`.
    │
    ├── references         <- Data dictionaries, manuals, and all other explanatory materials.
    │
    ├── reports            <- Generated analysis as HTML, PDF, LaTeX, etc.
    │   └── figures        <- Generated graphics and figures to be used in reporting
    │
    ├── requirements.txt   <- The requirements file for reproducing the analysis environment, e.g.
    │                         generated with `pip freeze > requirements.txt`
    │
    ├── setup.py           <- makes project pip installable (pip install -e .) so src can be imported
    ├── src                <- Source code for use in this project.
    │   ├── __init__.py    <- Makes src a Python module
    │   │
    │   ├── data           <- Scripts to download or generate data
    │   │   └── make_dataset.py
    │   │
    │   ├── features       <- Scripts to turn raw data into features for modeling
    │   │   └── build_features.py
    │   │
    │   ├── models         <- Scripts to train models and then use trained models to make
    │   │   │                 predictions
    │   │   ├── predict_model.py
    │   │   └── train_model.py
    │   │
    │   └── visualization  <- Scripts to create exploratory and results oriented visualizations
    │       └── visualize.py
    │
    └── tox.ini            <- tox file with settings for running tox; see tox.readthedocs.io


--------

### 1. Data

  Dataset obtained from FeTA2021 Grand Challenge. Dataset consist of 80 subject of fetuses from 21 to 33 weeks. Images and masks are in the NIfTI format. 
  Dimensions of the raw MRIs are 256x256x256. There are 8 class which includes background label.
["The dataset facilitates the development of novel machine-learning and deep-learning based multi-class segmentation methods for the quantification of brain development on fetal MRI. The ultimate goal is to capture pathological developmental trajectories by the automated quantification of the prenatal development, for which automated approaches free of observer bias are indispensable."](http://neuroimaging.ch/feta) Some brief information about the labels can be found below. For more information, please follow the links in the notes.

| dHCP label | Name | Notes |
| :- | -: | :-: |
| Label 1 | Intracranial space and extra-axial CSF spaces | Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) is a clear, colorless body fluid found within the tissue that surrounds the brain and spinal cord of all vertebrates.[[1]](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cerebrospinal_fluid) 
| Label 2 | Gray Matter | Grey matter (or gray matter) is a major component of the central nervous system, consisting of neuronal cell bodies, neuropil (dendrites and unmyelinated axons), glial cells (astrocytes and oligodendrocytes), synapses, and capillaries.[[2]](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Grey_matter) 
| Label 3 | White Matter | White matter refers to areas of the central nervous system (CNS) that are mainly made up of myelinated axons, also called tracts. [[3]](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/White_matter)
| Label 4 | Ventricles | The ventricles are structures that produce cerebrospinal fluid, and transport it around the cranial cavity. [[4]](https://teachmeanatomy.info/neuroanatomy/vessels/ventricles/)
| Label 5 | Cerebellum | The cerebellum (which is Latin for “little brain”) is a major structure of the hindbrain that is located near the brainstem. This part of the brain is responsible for coordinating voluntary movements. It is also responsible for a number of functions including motor skills such as balance, coordination, and posture. [[5]](https://www.verywellmind.com/what-is-the-cerebellum-2794964)
| Label 6 | Deep gray matter | Grey matter is classed as either superficial or deep. The superficial grey matter, also called brain cortex, is on the outside of the brain. The deep grey matter is made up of neurons from which originate deep nerve fibres. These neurons tend to form clumps of basal nuclei.[[6]](https://www.msif.org/news/2014/12/16/role-deep-grey-matter-brain-plays-ms/)
| Label 7 | Brainstem and spinal cord| The brainstem (or brain stem) is the posterior stalk-like part of the brain that connects the cerebrum with the spinal cord. [[7]](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brainstem)


<br><br>
<p align="center">
  <img src="https://github.com/ugurcanakyuz/Thesis/blob/torchio_impl/Code/DataAnalysis/notebook_images/brain3.jpg?raw=true">
</p>
<p align="center">Figure 1. Brain tissues. <a href="https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Ching-Cheng-Chuang/publication/224283818/figure/fig1/AS:213943978074118@1428019627889/Three-dimensional-in-vivo-MRI-T1-brain-image-In-the-simulation-the-three-dimensional.png"> Reference</a></p>


  
### 2. Models
Models have been implemented for the research. 
<br>
<div align="center">
    <img src="https://github.com/ugurcanakyuz/3D-Volumetric-MedicalImageSegmentationWithDeepLearning/blob/ProjectStructurev1/reports/figures/b2.3dunet.png" alt="3D U-Net architecture."/>
    <p>Figure 2. 3D U-Net Architecture</p>
</div>

<br>

<div align="center">
    <img src="https://github.com/ugurcanakyuz/3D-Volumetric-MedicalImageSegmentationWithDeepLearning/blob/ProjectStructurev1/reports/figures/b2.3dsdunet2.png" alt="3D SDU-Net architecture."/>
    <p>Figure 3. 3D SDU-Net (Stacked Dilated U-Net) A new 3D Segmentation model based on <a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiomed.2022.105891">SDU-Net</a> was developed for this research.</p>
</div>

### 3. Results
Results of models trained and tested on the FeTA2021 dataset.
<br>
#### 3.1. Whisker-Box Plots
<div align="center">
    <img src="https://github.com/ugurcanakyuz/3D-Volumetric-MedicalImageSegmentationWithDeepLearning/blob/ProjectStructurev1/reports/figures/test_box_us.png" alt="Whisker-Box Plot of 3D UNet on FeTA2021 Dataset." width="400" />
    <img src="https://github.com/ugurcanakyuz/3D-Volumetric-MedicalImageSegmentationWithDeepLearning/blob/ProjectStructurev1/reports/figures/test_cm_us.png" alt="Confusion Matrix of 3D UNet on FeTA2021 Dataset." width="400" height="349" />
    <p>Figure 4. Whisker-Box plot (left) and Confusion Matrix (right) of 3D U-Net model.</p>
</div>

<br>
<div align="center">
    <img src="https://github.com/ugurcanakyuz/3D-Volumetric-MedicalImageSegmentationWithDeepLearning/blob/ProjectStructurev1/reports/figures/test_box_sdunet.png" alt="Whisker-Box Plot of 3D SDUNet on FeTA2021 Dataset." width="400" />
    <img src="https://github.com/ugurcanakyuz/3D-Volumetric-MedicalImageSegmentationWithDeepLearning/blob/ProjectStructurev1/reports/figures/test_cm_sdunet.png" alt="Confusion Matrix of 3D SDUNet on FeTA2021 Dataset." width="400" height="349" />
    <p>Figure 5. Whisker-Box plot (left) and Confusion Matrix (right) of 3D SDU-Net model.</p>
</div>

#### 3.2. Segmentation Outputs

<div align="center">
    <img src="https://github.com/ugurcanakyuz/3D-Volumetric-MedicalImageSegmentationWithDeepLearning/blob/ProjectStructurev1/reports/figures/sub-075_unet.png" alt="Segmentation outputs of 3D U-Net model." width="400" />
    <img src="https://github.com/ugurcanakyuz/3D-Volumetric-MedicalImageSegmentationWithDeepLearning/blob/ProjectStructurev1/reports/figures/sub-075_sdunet.png" alt="Segmentation outputs of 3D SDU-Net model." width="400" />
    <p>Figure 6. Segmentation outputs of 3D U-Net and 3D SDU-Net models for same fetal subject.</p>
</div>

<br><br><br>
<p><small>Project based on the <a target="_blank" href="https://drivendata.github.io/cookiecutter-data-science/">cookiecutter data science project template</a>. #cookiecutterdatascience</small></p>

Commit message:

Project structure tree was updated for new folders and files. To install and start project env instructions were added.
Former-commit-id: c5e81bd3ce4a6b75d423f2f7ce4403333eb21da1 [formerly f61ec6648e0abe6d4edeeec9c317be87c9ba7d04]
Former-commit-id: bfff42abdd28f2728e03f3f83563043fc6b95331

README.md, after:

![](https://img.shields.io/badge/PyTorch-1.10-green)
![](https://img.shields.io/badge/OpenCV-4.5-blue)
![](https://img.shields.io/badge/NiBabel-3.2-red)
# 3D (Volumetric) Medical Image Segmentation with Deep Learning
This GitHub repository was created for research focusing on the development of deep learning-based segmentation models for fetal brain tissue.


Project Organization
------------

    ├── LICENSE
    ├── Makefile           <- Makefile with commands like `make data` or `make train`
    ├── README.md          <- The top-level README for developers using this project.
    ├── data
    │   ├── external       <- Data from third party sources.
    │   ├── interim        <- Intermediate data that has been transformed.
    │   ├── processed      <- The final, canonical data sets for modeling.
    │   └── raw            <- The original, immutable data dump.
    │
    ├── docs               <- A default Sphinx project; see sphinx-doc.org for details
    │
    ├── dev_env            <- Files required to start the development environment in Windows. 
    │
    ├── models             <- Trained and serialized models, model predictions, or model summaries
    │
    ├── notebooks          <- Jupyter notebooks. Naming convention is a number (for ordering),
    │                         the creator's initials, and a short `-` delimited description, e.g.
    │                         `1.0-jqp-initial-data-exploration`.
    │
    ├── references         <- Data dictionaries, manuals, and all other explanatory materials.
    │
    ├── reports            <- Generated analysis as HTML, PDF, LaTeX, etc.
    │   └── figures        <- Generated graphics and figures to be used in reporting
    │
    ├── requirements.txt   <- The requirements file for reproducing the analysis environment, e.g.
    │                         generated with `pip freeze > requirements.txt`
    │
    ├── setup.py           <- makes project pip installable (pip install -e .) so src can be imported
    ├── src                <- Source code for use in this project.
    │   ├── __init__.py    <- Makes src a Python module
    │   │
    │   ├── data           <- Scripts to download, generate or transform data
    │   │   └── transforms
    │   │   └── Dataset.py
    │   │
    │   ├── features       <- Scripts to turn raw data into features for modeling
    │   │   └── build_features.py
    │   │
    │   ├── models         <- Scripts to train models and then use trained models to make
    │   │   │                 predictions
    │   │   └── models
    │   │   └── Evaluator.py
    │   │   └── Predictor.py
    │   │   └── Trainer.py
    │   │
    │   ├── utils  <- Scripts to load configuration parameters from yaml files and to use common rutines of the project
    │   │   └── Config.py
    │   │   └── LossFunctions.py
    │   │   └── Utils.py
    │   │
    │   └── visualization  <- Scripts to create exploratory and results oriented visualizations
    │       └── Tensorboard.py
    │       └── Visualization.py
    │
    └── tox.ini            <- tox file with settings for running tox; see tox.readthedocs.io


--------

## Installation

It is recommended to use virtual environment and add the 'src' folder to the virtual environment in order to run the project.

1. To install virtualenvwrapper and create a new virtualenv [see](https://virtualenvwrapper.readthedocs.io/en/latest/install.html).
2. Install required libraries for the project:\
   `pip install -r requirements.txt`
3. To add 'src' folder into virtualenv: \
   `add2virtualenv src/`
4. Experiments were managed in the Jupyter Notebooks. Therefore, there is need to add new virtual environment kernel to Jupyter Notebook. To add new kernel to JN:\
   `python3 -m pip install ipykernel`\
   `python3 -m ipykernel install --user`
5. In order to start development environment in Windows required commands can be found in [here](dev_env/). 

### 1. Data

  Dataset obtained from FeTA2021 Grand Challenge. Dataset consist of 80 subject of fetuses from 21 to 33 weeks. Images and masks are in the NIfTI format. 
  Dimensions of the raw MRIs are 256x256x256. There are 8 class which includes background label.
["The dataset facilitates the development of novel machine-learning and deep-learning based multi-class segmentation methods for the quantification of brain development on fetal MRI. The ultimate goal is to capture pathological developmental trajectories by the automated quantification of the prenatal development, for which automated approaches free of observer bias are indispensable."](http://neuroimaging.ch/feta) Some brief information about the labels can be found below. For more information, please follow the links in the notes.

| dHCP label | Name | Notes |
| :- | -: | :-: |
| Label 1 | Intracranial space and extra-axial CSF spaces | Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) is a clear, colorless body fluid found within the tissue that surrounds the brain and spinal cord of all vertebrates.[[1]](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cerebrospinal_fluid) 
| Label 2 | Gray Matter | Grey matter (or gray matter) is a major component of the central nervous system, consisting of neuronal cell bodies, neuropil (dendrites and unmyelinated axons), glial cells (astrocytes and oligodendrocytes), synapses, and capillaries.[[2]](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Grey_matter) 
| Label 3 | White Matter | White matter refers to areas of the central nervous system (CNS) that are mainly made up of myelinated axons, also called tracts. [[3]](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/White_matter)
| Label 4 | Ventricles | The ventricles are structures that produce cerebrospinal fluid, and transport it around the cranial cavity. [[4]](https://teachmeanatomy.info/neuroanatomy/vessels/ventricles/)
| Label 5 | Cerebellum | The cerebellum (which is Latin for “little brain”) is a major structure of the hindbrain that is located near the brainstem. This part of the brain is responsible for coordinating voluntary movements. It is also responsible for a number of functions including motor skills such as balance, coordination, and posture. [[5]](https://www.verywellmind.com/what-is-the-cerebellum-2794964)
| Label 6 | Deep gray matter | Grey matter is classed as either superficial or deep. The superficial grey matter, also called brain cortex, is on the outside of the brain. The deep grey matter is made up of neurons from which originate deep nerve fibres. These neurons tend to form clumps of basal nuclei.[[6]](https://www.msif.org/news/2014/12/16/role-deep-grey-matter-brain-plays-ms/)
| Label 7 | Brainstem and spinal cord| The brainstem (or brain stem) is the posterior stalk-like part of the brain that connects the cerebrum with the spinal cord. [[7]](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brainstem)


<br><br>
<p align="center">
  <img src="https://github.com/ugurcanakyuz/Thesis/blob/torchio_impl/Code/DataAnalysis/notebook_images/brain3.jpg?raw=true">
</p>
<p align="center">Figure 1. Brain tissues. <a href="https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Ching-Cheng-Chuang/publication/224283818/figure/fig1/AS:213943978074118@1428019627889/Three-dimensional-in-vivo-MRI-T1-brain-image-In-the-simulation-the-three-dimensional.png"> Reference</a></p>


  
### 2. Models
Models have been implemented for the research. 
<br>
<div align="center">
    <img src="https://github.com/ugurcanakyuz/3D-Volumetric-MedicalImageSegmentationWithDeepLearning/blob/ProjectStructurev1/reports/figures/b2.3dunet.png" alt="3D U-Net architecture."/>
    <p>Figure 2. 3D U-Net Architecture</p>
</div>

<br>

<div align="center">
    <img src="https://github.com/ugurcanakyuz/3D-Volumetric-MedicalImageSegmentationWithDeepLearning/blob/ProjectStructurev1/reports/figures/b2.3dsdunet2.png" alt="3D SDU-Net architecture."/>
    <p>Figure 3. 3D SDU-Net (Stacked Dilated U-Net) A new 3D Segmentation model based on <a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiomed.2022.105891">SDU-Net</a> was developed for this research.</p>
</div>

### 3. Results
Results of models trained and tested on the FeTA2021 dataset.
<br>
#### 3.1. Whisker-Box Plots
<div align="center">
    <img src="https://github.com/ugurcanakyuz/3D-Volumetric-MedicalImageSegmentationWithDeepLearning/blob/ProjectStructurev1/reports/figures/test_box_us.png" alt="Whisker-Box Plot of 3D UNet on FeTA2021 Dataset." width="400" />
    <img src="https://github.com/ugurcanakyuz/3D-Volumetric-MedicalImageSegmentationWithDeepLearning/blob/ProjectStructurev1/reports/figures/test_cm_us.png" alt="Confusion Matrix of 3D UNet on FeTA2021 Dataset." width="400" height="349" />
    <p>Figure 4. Whisker-Box plot (left) and Confusion Matrix (right) of 3D U-Net model.</p>
</div>

<br>
<div align="center">
    <img src="https://github.com/ugurcanakyuz/3D-Volumetric-MedicalImageSegmentationWithDeepLearning/blob/ProjectStructurev1/reports/figures/test_box_sdunet.png" alt="Whisker-Box Plot of 3D SDUNet on FeTA2021 Dataset." width="400" />
    <img src="https://github.com/ugurcanakyuz/3D-Volumetric-MedicalImageSegmentationWithDeepLearning/blob/ProjectStructurev1/reports/figures/test_cm_sdunet.png" alt="Confusion Matrix of 3D SDUNet on FeTA2021 Dataset." width="400" height="349" />
    <p>Figure 5. Whisker-Box plot (left) and Confusion Matrix (right) of 3D SDU-Net model.</p>
</div>

#### 3.2. Segmentation Outputs

<div align="center">
    <img src="https://github.com/ugurcanakyuz/3D-Volumetric-MedicalImageSegmentationWithDeepLearning/blob/ProjectStructurev1/reports/figures/sub-075_unet.png" alt="Segmentation outputs of 3D U-Net model." width="400" />
    <img src="https://github.com/ugurcanakyuz/3D-Volumetric-MedicalImageSegmentationWithDeepLearning/blob/ProjectStructurev1/reports/figures/sub-075_sdunet.png" alt="Segmentation outputs of 3D SDU-Net model." width="400" />
    <p>Figure 6. Segmentation outputs of 3D U-Net and 3D SDU-Net models for same fetal subject.</p>
</div>

<br><br><br>
<p><small>Project based on the <a target="_blank" href="https://drivendata.github.io/cookiecutter-data-science/">cookiecutter data science project template</a>. #cookiecutterdatascience</small></p>
